The following show was recorded on the 7th of February 2012 and more
information can be found about Ray Peat's work at RayPeat.com that's R-A-Y-P-E-A-T.com
Hello and welcome to Politics and Science. I'm your host John Barkasin and
this is part three of a discussion about progesterone and Dr. Raymond Peat's work
with progesterone over the years. Dr. Peat, for those who don't know, has a PhD
in biology from the University of Oregon and with a speciality in physiology and
has done a lot of research in the fields of endocrinology and science history. So
Ray, welcome once again to Politics and Science. All right, so in the last two
shows, Ray, we covered some of the history of and your work with progesterone. This
week, I'm hoping, we'll be able to cover some of the politics and economic
pressures affecting the science of progesterone. So to start this off, in
spite of its proven anti-cancer, anti-inflammatory effects, progesterone is
now deemed a carcinogenic substance under California's Proposition 65. So I
guess my question is how did this turn of events come to pass?
Yeah, the proposition says that you can sell carcinogens in any form you want,
but you just have to quote the law that says this is known by the state of
California to cause cancer and/or birth defects and such. But it isn't a
law against selling carcinogens, just that you have to warn against them. And
the-partly driven by lawyers who were given the opportunity to enforce the law
instead of the state, lawyers could make-collect the fines themselves. They
chose to interpret the law to mean that the presence of anything which could be
carcinogenic in any other situation makes a product require the warning. So
that it ended up that parking lots had to be warned that they were
carcinogenic. The public had to see a sign if they went into the parking lot.
What was the rationale for the parking lots, Ray? Oh, it was either the
paving material or the fact that there were cars there emitting exhaust fumes.
Oh my god. Chocolate producers were sued, manufacturers of drinking glasses that
had paint on the outside, bread manufacturers, potato vendors, vegetables,
anything that-there was a whole wave of these insane prosecutions and lawyers
made a lot of money. And the real function of that law, besides enriching
lawyers, it was to put the warnings everywhere in the produce department of
grocery stores and on apartment buildings and on fishing tackle and
hardware and so on. So that it became a joke. Everything was labeled a
carcinogen, so the carcinogens became invisible. The real carcinogens were
submerged in this phony warning business. And it was still legal to sell
carcinogens, but since everything had the warning, the public basically wasn't
warned against the real carcinogens. And physicians could prescribe the
carcinogens as long as they were under a doctor's orders. That's a
brilliant, brilliant strategy on the part of business, it sounds like. Yeah, and
very bad for the public. It had been brought to the attention of the
Attorney General and so on. And the lawyers basically are in control of the
government so that anything that would impair their ability to shake down the
public doesn't interest the law enforcement people. I gathered some
evidence and asked the Attorney General if non-profit corporations aren't
supposed to take money from industries to destroy their competitors and such.
And I gathered up evidence that made it look pretty clear that that was what was
going on. They said if I can prove that they have committed a crime, they will
investigate. So if you do all the work. Then they would just investigate and say
they would prosecute. And I didn't quite follow, what does a non-profit have to
do with it? The non-profit organizations were being formed either as
fronts for lawyers to extort money or as I couldn't prove it because I
couldn't subpoena the documents. But on its surface it looks very much like the
competing industries are using those organizations to get rid of progesterone
among other products. Sure that makes perfect sense. So they basically form
kind of a cartel and go after their competitors. It's a very strange
law where you, it sounds like the Wild West, where you just anybody can
deputize themselves and go after somebody else to enforce that very open
ended law. Yeah and the state prescribes the type of penalty that they can get. I
forget it was like $50 for each drinking glass that was sold without a warning.
Wow. I heard it was a huge amount of money, millions of dollars that the
lawyers have collected. That's so Kafka-esque and it sounds so
ridiculous but it actually has serious repercussions for somebody who's trying
to sell a product that they think is is helpful. For instance what happens to you
if you don't obtain the California seal of approval of not being a carcinogen?
If you don't have 10 employees or more the law doesn't apply to you so you
legally shouldn't be able to tell anything without a warning except the
lawyers ignore that. They go ahead and extort money from people who just on the
face of the law it can't be applied to. And do they threaten to pursue you in
court if you don't pay them off or do they actually? Oh yeah, oh they do.
First they threaten you then they pursue you and they keep it going for
years. So it's basically extortion I guess. Yeah, if you google
"shakedown lawyers California" you'll get some of the history of it.
Okay I had no idea because in our state I think it carries quite a bit of
weight if you're listed as a carcinogen in the state of
California. Yeah, the California lawyers were getting big money from foreign
corporations even outside the US because they do business with California and
California has such a big economy that they control the world.
Okay well that sort of sets the context for the legal environment in California
and when did you become aware that progesterone was going to be coming
under the sights of these guys? I guess about 10 or 15 years ago some of
the manufacturers started labeling the progesterone itself known by California
to be a carcinogen. So it was already a done deal when you first heard about it?
Yeah I think it was 1987 when the California review happened I'm not sure
of the date when the Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment
is what California's board is called they call it WEHA and I they weren't
willing to give me the names of the people who were there qualified experts
by their definition who made those decisions but the law requires them to
either just automatically list it because World Health Organization's or
National Toxicology Program listed they could just defer to them but in this
case they decided to have their board of qualified experts look at the relevant
evidence and out of thousands of publications on the issue of cancer and
progesterone they picked out about a dozen articles that they said was the
relevant decisive evidence and of those several of them weren't even progesterone
there were birth control pills and things that contained no progesterone at
all they listed them as the relevant evidence but when I got them to send me
copies they weren't even about progesterone in several cases and then
the ones that did involve progesterone in the research every one of them was
totally incompetent as toxicology or science or cancer research they were
clearly manipulated to to get a case against progesterone but they failed in
every case they had only one outside person testified during the meeting
Richard Edgren and they asked him why he had chosen to testify and he said
because progesterone isn't a carcinogen and then he went over some of the studies
and mentioned that one of the studies using non progesterone chemicals had
produced some tumors that weren't metastatic but he wasn't in that moment
talking about progesterone but the chairman of the committee heard him say
metastatic even though he had said they weren't and and since the topic of the
meeting was progesterone you know Edgren wasn't talking about progesterone in
that case that was the basis for making the decision like the March brothers
couldn't have been sillier yeah yeah or Kafka couldn't have been more surreal
yeah you said Richard Edgren they asked him why he had chosen to testify it
sounds like he wasn't even going to be there except that he was concerned with
this yeah because he pointed out that if you call non carcinogens carcinogens
then what's the public going to think about real carcinogens you're going to
ruin the whole issue of public safety if you blur anti carcinogens with
carcinogens and one of the studies that they listed as evidence proving that
progesterone is a carcinogen the article introduced itself by reference to some
studies by Alexander Lipschutz who had published many papers and a book
describing the anti-tumor properties of progesterone yeah and this article
referenced that and said that they were checking up on on Lipschutz work but
Lipschutz in his paper that they were referring to had specified that
progesterone given continuously prevents or even sometimes reverses cancer
and in this paper that they the California considered evidence of
carcinogenicity they gave intermittent progesterone treatments exactly what
Lipschutz had said wouldn't prevent cancer and they concluded it doesn't
prevent cancer that was all paper consisted of a bad reputation of
Lipschutz evidence that progesterone prevents cancer and California
presented this this strange non refutation of progesterone as a cancer
preventive as evidence that it causes cancer. It's bizarre but very
effective it sounds like you know nobody's gonna question it because
they're the experts. All that was there was the title there are a panel of
experts it was probably the receptionist who looked up some titles that had
cancer and progesterone in them. And they just figured nobody's ever gonna care or
look into it. Yeah. And that's because there's no money behind making
progesterone as you pointed out in an earlier show so that they're not really
stepping on any big toes when they do this except the people who are actually
benefiting from the use of progesterone. Yeah and around the time that someone
petitioned to take progesterone off the list and that petition was rejected
because the person in charge of responding to the petition mentioned a
study that was done at the World Health Organization Cancer Research Agency as
having shown that progesterone was a carcinogen. So I looked that up and the
people at the World Health Organization said they didn't know of any such thing
but they looked carefully and finally found one with the same date that
California had cited and it wasn't about progesterone. What was it about?
Synthetic progesterone. Oh I see. And California had cited that one obscure
article not about progesterone to refute the petition that had presented evidence
that progesterone protects against cancer but that was just a way of saying
no don't bother us at the point that I asked them who made the decisions that
were decisive even though the decisions violated their own regulations. The head
of the agency said we don't have the resources to answer your questions
anymore. Like go away. Yeah. Please go away. You're bothering me. Yeah. And around the
same time someone petitioned to remove saccharin from the list of carcinogens
and there's a lot of evidence that saccharin is a carcinogen and the
California decided to remove it from their list on the basis that the reason
it causes cancer of the bladder in rats is peculiar to rat bladders and it's
sort of a crystallization and the concussion caused by falling crystals
on the wall of the bladder. Basically that's what the argument consisted of.
They had no evidence that it was the contact of crystals with the bladder but
they found the paper that said it does cause crystallization in the bladder.
Yeah. But there are also articles that showed that human urine
crystallizes in exactly the same way the rats did so there was nothing special
about the rat crystals. Yeah. It was just again the reaching as far as they could
not to see the evidence and so they took it off the list. Again just as false in
the other direction to take saccharin off the list because it's a big industry
moneymaker. Yeah. So it sounds like they're there to represent certain
interests and basically be a filter for what becomes available to the public or
not based on those interests not the public's interests. Yeah. That's their
public. The corporations are the only public they're concerned with. Yeah and I
recall from your newsletters that some of the tests they cited against
progesterone some of them were progestins as you said and you explained
last time that progestins actually have many of them have opposite effects of
progesterone. They're synthetic progesterone and they don't. Are they
considered synthetic? Is that the right term? Progestin? Well yeah they're
synthetic but they are there are different molecules so they aren't
progesterone at all. Right. Okay. And they're the industry got the FDA to
allow them to call them progestins even though they are good contraceptives they
prevent gestation but because there is a change in the lining of a rabbit uterus
under their influence that happens to coincide with the changes caused by
progesterone at least in one or two features. On the basis of that they call
a non-progestin a progestin. It's a contraceptive but they can see one
feature of overlap with progesterone so that's the strength for calling them a
progestin. I see and for those who didn't hear the first two parts of this talk
about progesterone Dr. Peate was telling us that many times progestins are
prescribed people think they're taking progesterone but they're actually taking
these different molecules named after progesterone but actually do not have
many of the benefits that progesterone does. Yeah in 1970 when I was
working on progesterone occasionally someone would say did you see the paper
in some big science magazine that progesterone causes cancer and at that
time they were actually putting it in the title progesterone causes cancer but
they weren't working with progesterone they were just even the editors of
science journals were letting them get away with calling things by what by
false names and by the early 70s the science world had clarified their
terminology enough so that they started consistently calling the the other
molecules progestins or progestogens and so there has been much less scientific
confusion about the terms but medical doctors are still pretty well confused
about the difference between the anti-progestational progestins and the
real progesterone. And consequently the public's also very confused because I
know a lot of people who are taking estrogen with progestins and they think
they're getting both progesterone and estrogen. Yeah natural progesterone has
to carry the warning that it can cause heart defects because some of the things
that are called progestins cause heart defects and so something that has one
property of progesterone gets to be called called the progestin and then
anything toxic that molecule does gets laid over on real progesterone and and
that prevents for example women with epilepsy are told to avoid progesterone
during pregnancy because it'll cause heart defects but actually the real
progesterone has been reported to prevent almost all birth defects when
it's used before pregnancy. And as we talked about in the earlier shows most
of these rulings seem to be connected to the estrogen industry which just one
drug alone we were talking about last week Premarin I think was two billion
dollars in sales roughly before the World Health Initiative tests became
public and estrogen sales dropped so Dr. Pete was saying last week that as
estrogen sales dropped progesterone sales were going up and this alarmed
the industry and consequently it seems like there's a move against progesterone.
Yeah and you can see it in some of the traditional centers of estrogen
promoting research they around that time turned against progesterone instead of
concentrating on on how good estrogen is they're stretching to find something bad
linked to progesterone. Hmm that's very interesting. Who is sitting on these
boards Ray? Where do these people come from? Do you know any of them or have
heard of them? Oh I looked up everyone on the board and we're talking about
the board that decided what was a carcinogen in California excuse me. Yeah
yeah some of them were linked to the the university that was doing the
anti-progesterone research and the leading anti-progesterone guy was
Malcolm Pike and he and one or two others formed a company to promote a
birth control pill based on his idea of protecting against progesterone and the
state of California was using federal grants and other funding to support
corporations his included so so government money was flowing into his
anti-progesterone business while he was sitting influential in saying that
progesterone is a carcinogen and everyone I looked up on the board was
either directly or indirectly concerned with with something competing for
example one of the people was on the board of a company promoting
transdermal medical treatments things that will administer drugs through the
skin while most of the progesterone products were being delivered through
the skin this person was representing a company that would would probably be in
line to market a medical progesterone transdermal. I see and and what
universities were they working for and what were their fields of expertise
where are they physiologists? Do you know? Most of it there was only one biologist
on the committee and several toxicologists and the University of
Southern California has I think the biggest concentration of anti
progesterone work. I looked at the USC website about five six years ago and I
found easily I think it was 140 references to the glorious properties
of estrogen and I found I forget numerous but not a competitive number
numerous references to progesterone but every one of them was about its harmful
properties and if you look at them objectively you have to look hard to
find an objectively beneficial effect of estrogen and you have to stretch very
hard to find a harmful effect of progesterone. Is the contents of this
library because they've called it or they've just always cultivated articles
with the right attitude as far as they're concerned? Well the things on the
website were research projects in progress. I think they were all in progress.
Right so they're being funded through the university probably from
pharmaceutical? Yeah. Research companies? Yeah. So that's basically that
university has come down on the side of the pharmaceutical companies that are
funding them. Yeah there are several labs around the country.
Berkeley has more recently moved in that direction. Michigan was a big
center of estrogen research and some of those people moved to UC Berkeley and
interestingly the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory is involved in
antiprogesterone research which seems to have grown out of the chemical warfare
line of thinking. Yeah that's really interesting that's a weapons lab
basically and why are they interested in estrogen research or
antiprogesterone research do you think? Well obviously would be for benign and
harmless purposes. I'm sure. Yeah are they affiliated with businesses do you
know? I don't know anything about the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory. I don't
know I think it's all government money. Well one of the things you've written
about Elwood Jensen who's the supposed inventor of the concept of the receptor
protein the hormone receptor is that right he invented that concept? Yeah
there were the idea of receptors in general was being discussed in various
fields but for estrogen the enzymologists were progressing very
quickly in understanding the effects of estrogen and molecules like estrogen
through the 1940s into the 1950s and one of the lines of very productive research
was showing that you can change estrogen back and forth between estrone and
estradiol. Estrone is relatively inactive estradiol is very active and
that was classified as enzymology and Jensen's argument was that if
estrogen acts by activating a genetic program and so it's only a female
acting substance because females are genetically determined to be female and
so what estrogen does is act on a receptor that activates a genetic
program and if something is acted on by enzymes men have enzymes that are going
to do the same reactions and the enzymology tended to generalize the
estrogen issue and make it a masculine problem as well as female but Jensen
got the only support from the atomic energy commission which controlled the
isotopes needed to do enzyme studies and he used an isotope labeled form of
estrogen and in his experiments with uterus tissue claimed to show that there
was no oxidation or reduction of estrogen by the uterus and said that's
the end of the enzyme tradition it's all receptor and genes now and that spread
through the research world and by mid 1960s was the dogma but then the
enzymologist started getting the same isotopes that he had had and showed that
in fact the old 1940s research was exactly what's happening and now
everyone knows that estrogen, estradiol and estrone are perfectly
interchangeable and that's exactly where progesterone and thyroid and stress
hormones interact with estrogen. Progesterone turns off some of the
enzymes that activate estrogen and activate enzymes that inactivate
estrogen so the enzyme approach opens up the whole issue of environmental
physiology, nutritional, metabolic effects on the estrogen system and
estrogen's deranging effects on all of those systems so that's all now coming
back but 50 years of belief in a genetic explanation of why estrogen is so good
for females and harmless to everyone else.
You got too fuzzy on that last sentence I couldn't understand it. Yeah I was
saying that Elwood Jensen the reason I brought him up is because you mentioned
Livermore labs and he worked in the chemical weapons industry isn't that
right? Yeah University of Chicago I think is where he was working and that was a
big weapons laboratory. The government doesn't say much about their chemical
biological warfare research but if you look at the careers of some of the
famous biologists you see that there you can't explain their achievements other
than that they were being pushed by the Pentagon to get the information that
they needed for German chemical warfare. So just to put a political context on
Elwood Jensen's work and relate that to science you're saying that the fact that
he was able to shift the damage that estrogen does to the genetic causes that
sort of removed the liability of government pollution and industry
pollution away from them to basically random genetic problems. Yeah until just
I guess about 25 years ago biologists thought about estrogen working on the
estrogen receptor as simply activating femaleness in genetic females and that
therefore it would act only on a uterus or a female breast or the female
pituitary as if a man didn't share practically all enzymes and genes with
women. Yeah it was just just an extreme case of genetic cleaning up of the
dangerous possibilities. And the actual reality of how things work. Yeah estrogen
has been known for about 30 or 40 years to act on every kind of tissue. You can
find the estrogen receptor everywhere but even without the estrogen receptor
you can demonstrate that it works on any kind of tissue and some of the
estrogenic compounds attached to the so-called estrogen receptor but some
have estrogenic effects without touching the estrogen receptor so really they
should have a new name it's the sometime estrogen receptor activator system but
it isn't really the crucial thing because you can get estrogenic effects
from radiation or cyanide or suffocation or various stresses and infections and
so on they'll all bring on estrus and swelling of cells and activation of the
uterus and so on. Inflammation. Yeah and the overlap of stress and radiation and
industrial smoke and so on with estrogen that's one of the things that has been
carefully avoided and the receptor idea is crucial in covering that up. Yeah it
sounds like what he came up with was a very sort of smoke and mirrors cartoon
for selling a concept of how everything works in such a way that it fit in with
the popular idea the gene being how a life is directed. People may be
wondering why we're talking about estrogen when this is a show about
progesterone. Well estrogen in the physiological situation activates the
production of progesterone and then progesterone knocks down the production
of estrogen so it's a matter of an occasional stimulus from stress or
estrogen which turns on a system that then definitively gets rid of estrogen
and leaves things operating for the rest of the month and it's only the
exaggerated prolonged effect of estrogen that becomes a danger and
progesterone is is the basic thing for getting rid of estrogen and if you look
at the enzymes involved progesterone inactivates the aromatase enzyme that
produces estrogen from the androgens and it activates the two types of
detoxifying enzymes the glucuronide transferase and the sulfur transferase
that attach sulfuric acid to make it water-soluble and it estrogen opposes
those and progesterone inactivates the estrogen activated enzymes that remove
the detoxified sulfate and glucuronide so it's just an amazingly comprehensive
system that progesterone does and only real progesterone does that so
systematically it knocks out the production and maintenance and
activation of estrogen and it even destroys the so-called estrogen receptor
protein so at the action and the production end and all of the
intermediate steps progesterone systematically destroys the estrogen
system and that's one of the reasons that progesterone is so universally
important but it's the the opposite side of why estrogen is so universally
dangerous progesterone even protects against radiation as part of that same
system because radiation imitates estrogen and the cancers produced by
either radiation or estrogen these are equally protected against by progesterone
so it's a comprehensive protective substance against the full range of
biological variants and Elwood Jensen the inventor of the estrogen receptor
that concept and he goes on to talk about his work it was apparent to him
that very small amounts of estrogen cause cancer and that was his challenge
is to figure out why that was and he went on to try to discover other
chemicals that opposed to estrogen and he came up with tamoxifen I think
everybody knows that has a lot of bad side effects a man named Dan Lednesser
gives a more insider view of where tamoxifen came from and the people who
were working on the the fact that estrogen is likely polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons in causing not only cancer but inflammation and and fibrosis they
were looking for anti-inflammatory things because the polycyclic
hydrocarbons and estrogen create inflammation and looking for
anti-inflammatory things they accidentally found that tamoxifen was
anti-estrogen as well and out of that line of research according to Dan
Lednesser even Celebrex the what do you call them the COX-2 inhibiting
enzades even these derived from that line of research that was thinking
about a more basic view of what estrogen does the receptor wasn't involved at all
in that kind of thinking okay well maybe I could be this quoting Elwood Johnson
but it sounded like he was involved in something to do with tamoxifen and but
the thing I didn't understand was it's been known for a long time that
progesterone does oppose estrogen and does it so completely as you pointed out
and so why were they even bothering to look for something else that's what
puzzled me I think you have to imagine the mentality of like is the person he
said suggested the looking for how the estrogen affects the tissues was Charles
Huggins Huggins was um I think he founded the lab that that Jensen was
working in and according to Jensen he gave him the the idea but I think you
have to see what flakes they were even though it was the University of Chicago
they they were just totally unaware of of the world of biochemistry as related
to cancer I don't I don't really know how it was possible you'd have to have a
detailed biography of how what courses they were teaching and so on but Huggins
is the guy that theorized that since you know he read a textbook in which they
made a rooster grow its comb by giving it testosterone and the classical thing
isn't so they said since testosterone makes a man develop a prostate gland and
estrogen makes women develop breasts if you want to stop the growth of cancer in
the breast you will either remove estrogen or give testosterone that was
his first suggestion I think and for the prostate you would either castrate the
man or give the man estrogen or both because his simple idea was that the
female and male were opposite and so if you give the opposite hormone you will
antagonize the growth promoting effect of their hormone basically a completely
idiotic idea at the time he proposed it but no one was there to tell him so that
immediately started doctors all over the country castrating men by the millions
and for I guess 45 50 years they were giving men estrogen with or without
castration to treat prostate cancer all on that very ignorant early 20th century
idea of opposition of the hormones I had no idea that that went on the castration
yeah and Huggins was the one who besides proposing castrating men to cure prostate
cancer and giving them estrogen he first proposed removing the ovaries to stop
the estrogenic stimulation and then since some of them didn't recover from
that he took out their adrenal glands as another source of estrogen and that was
practiced up right through the 60s I think until about 1970 and at one point
Huggins even proposed treating breast cancer with estrogen just didn't make
any sense but he had sort of a Frankenstein mentality let's tinker
with things and maybe we'll come up with something and he saw everything and just
black and white yeah and that that's the mentality that Jensen was working with
and he you know I think it involved basically either incredibly bad science
or deliberate fraud for him to say that estrogen absolutely wasn't being
metabolized in the tissues where where it was having an effect and that was
that was his proof of the that it acted only through the receptor well that's
reminds me of HL Mencken saying that for for every complex problem there's a
simple simple concise answer that's absolutely wrong and perhaps we only
have about 10 minutes left I believe it would be good for people to hear about
how progesterone does work in combating cancer I don't think we've actually
talked too much about that mostly we've talked about its anti-inflammatory
effects but and maybe you could cite some of the uses it's actually had with
success well Alexander Lipschitz was the person who did the most comprehensive
work showing that where estrogen causes fibrosis fibroids first and eventually
cancer it acts first on the uterus then on the breasts then on the lungs
kidneys brain and it's just a matter of where estrogen concentrates that it
tends to cause fibromas and cancers and in every one of those situations
progesterone was protective and now it's known that it has this about I think nine
different mechanisms by which it eliminates the estrogen problem so the
cause and effect outcome was defined by 1950 by Alexander Lipschitz and and then
the more detailed stuff is still being developed an Italian has done some very
good work looking at the range of things progesterone does defensively someone
named Mendelsohn has done a lot of work on the protective effects of progesterone
against estrogen but the the full reason of why progesterone is is protective
against cancer you have to look at the the whole spectrum of what estrogen is
doing the first thing estrogen does is cause the cell to take up water and
taking up water stimulates cell division and fat production and a lot of other
enzyme activities these effects happen within minutes of the time of estrogen
exposure and so anyone looking at simple tissue biological experiments way back
80 years as soon as they had a concentrated estrogen like material they
could see that it instantaneously was causing the tissue to take up water and
begin producing fats and other substances and to divide so it takes at
least several hours for genes to get activated and cause cellular changes so
obviously the receptor wasn't involved in those instantaneous effects of
estrogen and those are exactly what the essence of the cancer problem is if you
start an inflammation that causes cells to keep taking up water in that stressed
condition of activating cell chemistry they're using energy faster and the
stimulation of cell division is is tending to use up the supply of oxygen
and sugar in my thesis research one of the things I did was show that adding
estrogen to a system such as uterus lowers the oxygen tension it just sucks
the oxygen out of the system and so it kills the embryo that's trying to
implant if there's a little too much estrogen or not enough progesterone so
that stimulation creates an oxygen deficiency and as far as sugar is
available the sugar will be glycolyzed to produce emergency energy in the
absence of enough oxygen to meet the stimulation the glycolysis produces
lactic acid the production of lactic acid leaving the cell raises the pH
inside the cell and that increased pH keeps the swelling going on activates
cell division and expensive energy so it needs something from the outside to stop
the production of lactic acid and deliver oxygen and so on progesterone is
one of the essential things for stopping that process but once it starts under
the influence of estrogen you get the lactic acid production which creates a
vicious cycle of cell activation and the lactic acid acts as a it increases the
supply of blood and spreads growth of blood vessels into the environment so it
it activates everything that you need to produce a tumor and all that's needed is
the absence of an anti-inflammatory energy restoring substance such as
aspirin or progesterone to stop this process if you don't have those
available of the lactic acid stimulates surrounding cells to change their
physiology in ways that you have a progressive increase of the malignancy
behavior of the cells in in the simplest situation an injury causes the lactic
acid to be produced which activates the energy changes and growth to heal the
wound but at a certain point the system should come in with the anti-inflammatory
substances such as progesterone to finish off the healing and in the
absence the healing attempt at healing simply goes on and creates this swelling
and oxygen deficient situation and if you grow cells in the culture dish and
deprive them of oxygen just by having them in a dish without good circulation
they will eventually mutate and form other types of cells that cause a
derangement and alteration of the tissue type so all of the steps of
cancerization can be seen structurally and metabolically in terms of wound
healing but can't be brought to completion.
Oh yeah that's that's good I like that and and I think Harry Rubin you've
pointed out has basically proven that it's that cancer is not from a gene gone
bad but rather the tissue itself has developed an unhealthy state it could
you we have a couple minutes if you could maybe cover that briefly.
He's just honestly summarized the real cancer research showing that the deranged
metabolism and structure is what causes the chromosomal damage so the instead of
genes causing the tumor the tumor causes the genetic defects.
Which is the opposite of what we hear basically every day in our popular culture when people
talk about cancers.
Yeah and when an oncologist or pathologist says your tissue shows abnormal cell
division and the wrong number of chromosomes and such if you they said
that means we have to cut it out and irradiate you and so on but if you look
at the fate of those deranged cells they're going to live maybe to the next
attempt to divide then they don't have the right number of chromosomes and the
halves will die so they're very short-lived once they get to that deranged
state but the death of the cell contributes to the inflammation of the
area and so stopping the inflammation and energy deficit is always the solution
to the problem.
And it's now recognized by some oncologists that the reason a malignant
cancer reforms after they've irradiated the area or cut out the cancer or both
the reason it reforms is that stem cells are called into the inflamed area that
has been treated and even if you irradiate a healthy area it will call
stem cells in to try to repair the wound and if the radiation deranged the
fibrous material in that area you'll produce a cancer from the irradiation.
So whenever you injure a tissue by removing a tumor you're just guaranteeing
that the body will try to repair the wound by sending in new cells which then
turn into cancer cells if the area is still sick.
So the way to actually heal or to stay healthy is to make sure that your
cellular environment is a healthy one.
So for anti-inflammatory substances that people can use, progesterone is one
of them and aspirin is another.
And anti-histamines, going way back 50 years people were seeing those anti-histamines
with occasionally cure cancer but that just didn't catch on in the profession.
10 or 15 years ago when I would mention it to someone with cancer they would
think I was like the doctor saying take an aspirin and call me later.
Call me from the next life.
But you're saying that progesterone and aspirin are actually viable cancer
treatments.
Yeah and some of the anti-histamines are definitely protective.
Alright, well if people want to read more about this they can find out lots of
Ray Peat's ideas at Raypeat.com.
That's R-A-Y-P-E-A-T dot com where I think Ray you said you had 70 articles up
there or so.
Yeah, I'll be putting about a dozen more up in a couple of weeks I think.
That's great.
It's a beautiful website by the way.
I love the sombrero and the ice cream.
Oh thanks.
And we have been talking to Dr. Raymond Peat who has a PhD in biology from the
University of Oregon and with speciality in physiology and also has done extensive
research in endocrinology and science history.
And as always it's been a real pleasure to talk to you Ray.
Thanks so much for coming on.
Okay, okay.
Thank you.
That wraps it up for Politics and Science this week.
Please tune in again next week for another edition of Politics and Science.
can be found at RadioForAll.net